## <center>Impact of Rising Sea Levels on Coastal Residential Real Estate Assets</center>



#### Project Motivation and Scope: Why Coastal Real Estate and Why Sea Level Rise?
Real estate holdings have been battered by a slew of extreme weather events like hurricanes, wildfires etc. that have increased in frequency as a result of climate change. Another risk, particularly for properties in low lying coastal plains, is that of sea levels rising (SLR) at an accelerated pace. About 128 million people or about 40% of the US population resides in coastal counties <sup>[1](https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast-facts/economics-and-demographics.html)</sup> and may be affected by SLR over the medium to long term. This project would like to bring awareness to regions that may be exposed to this risk. More specifically, this project aims to provide visual aids to support the general public's understanding of SLR risks, e.g., flooding, so that they can make more informed real estate purchase decisions, particularly in coastal plains. It may also be used as a tool by mortgage lenders and banks to better visualize coverage regions that may be an emerging risk during the life of the mortgage. In addition to visual aids, this project provides specific information, at the census tract level on regions expected to be impacted in the medium term (2050) and longer term (2100) in various scenarios of SLR.

Global warming has caused sea levels to rise at double the rate previously observed in the 20th century (1.4 mm per year for most of the 20th century compared to 3.5 mm per year from 2006 to 2015).<sup>[2](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-global-sea-level)</sup> Per the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)'s 2022 Sea Level Rise Technical Report, relative sea level along the contiguous US coastline is expected to rise on average as much over the next 30 years (~1ft over 2020–2050) as it has over the last 100 years (1920–2020). If high greenhouse gas emissions continue in the future, the average SLR for the contiguous United States coastline is projected to be ~7ft (2.2m) by 2100 (relative to 2000 sea levels). Even at low emission rates, the average sea SLR for the contiguous United States coastline is projected to be ~2ft (0.6m) by 2100 and ~1ft by 2050.<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup> Furthermore, higher sea levels will also cause tide and storm surge heights to increase, resulting in more disruptive high tide flooding (HTF) events than occuring today. (Minor disruptive HTF events projected to increase from 3 events/year in 2020 to >10 events/year by 2050, and major destructive HTF events projected to increase from 0.04 events/year in 2020 to 0.2 events/year by 2050).<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup> 

While rising sea levels may not be immediate concern for many home buyers today, accelerated sea level rising is a longer term risk worth factoring into residential real estate purchase decisions given these assets may be held for longer durations and may also be passed down from generation to generation. At this time, lenders are less exposed to SLR risk since typical residential mortgages are 30 year terms, after which, these exposures would be transferred to the home owner. However, this is still an emerging risk area worth paying close attention to, especially if sea levels rise at a faster than anticipate rate, and their impact begins to be felt within mortgage life. In particular, over the medium term (2050), the lower bound for the contiguous US SLR is 1ft (higher bound 2ft) and while the specific SLR varies region over region within this range, e.g., the east and west gulf coast is expected to be more severely impacted by SLR than the north west and south west coasts<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup>, all coastlines in the contiguous US are expected to be impacted to some degree over the medium term.

#### Project Scenario Design
As stated above, the goals of this project are twofold: one; to give the general public (potential home buyers, mortgage lenders) a tool to visualize the regional impacts of various severities of SLR in the contiguous US, and two; to provide specific information (FIPS codes) on the census tracts that would be impacted in each SLR severity scenario. Homebuyers and mortgage lenders can then factor in this census tract level location information into their purchase decisions to access how much, if any, haircuts they would like to apply to their assessment of property value. For instance, properties currently in FEMA high risk zones are know to have ongoing higher insurance and associated costs, <i>even</i> in the absence of an active flooding event associated damage costs. It is expected that homebuyers take these additional costs into account when making purchasing decisions. While, there are no such known higher costs in SLR zones at present, as this risk evolves, and associated extreme weather events potentially become even more frequent, FEMA insurance type fixed costs may appear in non FEMA SLR zones as well.

<ins>Over the Long Term (by 2100)</ins>: This project has been designed as a scenario based qualitative stress test to assess how the various coastal counties/census tracts within the contigious United States would be impacted by various SLR levels over the longer term (2100). The scenario design process is based on the principles utilized in the Federal Reverse Capital Stress Testing exercise and considers three scenarios; one baseline scenario and two "plausible but severe" scenarios of SLR<sup>[4](https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2023-Stress-Test-Scenarios.htm)</sup>. The specific levels of SLR chosen for each of these scenarios was based on the 2022 SLR Technical Report published by NOAA<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup> that outlines 6 levels of projected SLR ranging from 0.6m (approx. 2ft) to 2.2m (approx. 7ft) by 2100 (hereafter referred to as "NOAA SLR scenarios"). In particular, 3 NOAA SLR long term levels are considered in this project: - Low (0.6m or approx. 2ft), Intermediate (1.2m or approx. 4ft) and High (2.2m or approx. 7ft); these projected SLR levels have been mapped to the qualitative stress testing scenarios as shown below:

* A <b>Baseline Scenario</b> where sea levels are projected to rise 2 feet
* An <b>Adverse Scenario</b> where sea levels are projected to rise 4 feet 
* A <b>Severely Adverse Scenario</b> where sea levels are projected to rise 7 feet

The Baseline Scenario is designed to be one that has a relatively high expected probability of occurance. NOAA has a "Low" SLR of 0.6m (approximately 2ft) by 2100 (relative to sea levels in 2000) and is expected to occur even at low emission levels (>92% certainity at all levels of global temperature rise)<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup>. Note that, sea levels are expected to rise even if climate change mitigation succeeds in limiting surface air temperatures in the coming decades, given ocean warming that has <i>already</i> occurred<sup>[2](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-global-sea-level)</sup>. 

The Adverse and Severely Advserse Scenarios are meant to be "plausible but severe" scenarios of SLR. NOAA's Intermediate SLR of 1.2m (approximately 4ft), and High SLR of 2.2m (approximately 7ft) by 2100, have been considered for the Advserse and Severely Adverse scenarios respectively. These high SLRs are associated with higher green house gas emissions and corresponding larger increases in global temperatures compared to pre-industrial levels. Extreme scenarios of SLR greater than 2.5m (approximately 8ft) are no longer considered plausible by 2100<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup> and so the max SLR scenario considered in this project is the "plausible but severe" NOAA High SLR of 7feet for the Severely Adverse Scenario.

<ins>Over the Medium Term (by 2050)</ins>: In addition to long term SLR impacts, this project also analyzes census tracts expected to be impacted by SLR over the medium term (2050). Over the medium term, SLR is bound on the lower end by 1ft and on the higher end by 2ft for the contiguous United States. Recent scientific developments have led to an improved understanding of the factors driving SLR and therefore, there is a lot more confidence in this narrower range (irrespective of the future course of emission pathways)<sup>[3](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report-sections.html)</sup>. Due to this increase confidence in the SLR predictions over the mediuk term, this project does not use a scenario based approach for the medium term. Instead, all contiguous US coastal census tracts at risk for SLR of 1ft by 2050 are considered at risk over the medium term in this project.


#### Data Analysis and Observations: Current Risks vs Emerging Risks

This project analyzed 20 coastal states in the contiguous United States covering ~200 coastal counties and ~22K coastal census tracts within them. Each census tract was analyzed in terms of whether is currently at risk, i.e., "Current Risk Regions", vs. if it could be at risk in the future over the medium to long term, i.e., "Emerging Risk Regions". 

The first part of the project involved understanding current risks. In terms of sea level rise, one of the simplest forms in which it could manifest itself would be flooding. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has identified regions that are at high risk for flooding (FEMA floodplains)<sup>[5](https://www.fema.gov/flood-maps)</sup>. This project used FEMA high risk floodplains as a proxy for areas that are currently known to be at risk for coastal flooding. In this project, these regions are considered "Current Risk Regions". 

The second part of this project delves into identifying census tracts that may be at risk in the medium or longer term. NOAA has identified coastal plains with the US that would be impacted at various levels of sea level rise; this project utilized NOAA SLR data from 1 through 7 feet to assess regional impacts in coastal counties and identify relevant impacted coastal census tracts that could become an emerging risk over the medium term (2050) or longer term (2100), i.e., "Emerging Risk Regions". 

This project divides the emerging risk into four categories - one category covering the medium term (given there is more confidence in the SLR predictions, no scenario based approach is needed over the medium term) and three scenario based longer term categores:

* Emerging Medium Term Risk (1 ft SLR by 2050),
* Emerging Long Term Risk in Baseline Scenario (upto 2ft SLR by 2100),
* Emerging Long Term Risk in Adverse Scenario (upto 4ft SLR by 2100), and
* Emerging Long Term Risk in Sev. Adverse Scenario (upto 7ft SLR by 2100).                    

Given the high confidence in the SLR projections over the medium term and given that 1ft is at the lower end of those projections, the census tracts identified as emerging risks over the medium term are more conservative estimates of SLR risk and should be considered high risk. Over the longer term, the severity of SLR will be influenced by green house glass emission rates. Even at low emission rates, SLR of 2ft is expected over most of the contiguous US. Census tracts identified in the baseline scenario should be considered high-medium risk at this time. At higher emission rates, SLR could vary been 4ft (NOAA intermediate SLR) and 7ft (NOAA high SLR). Census tracts identified in the adverse and severely adverse scenario should be considered medium-low and low risk respectively, at this time.

